[DOC] adding prometheus-operator-cli design proposal (#6435)
prometheus-operator/prometheus-operator: Documentation/designs/prometheus-operator-cli.md

# Prometheus Operator CLI

## Summary

This document proposes a new CLI tool to manage Prometheus Operator resources, allowing users to create, update, and delete Prometheus Operator resources using a simple CLI interface as well as
troubleshoot and debug Prometheus Operator resources.

## Background

> During KubeCon Paris 2024, we received feedback from users that managing Prometheus Operator resources is difficult and error-prone. Users reported that they often encounter issues when creating, updating, and deleting Prometheus Operator resources, and that troubleshooting and debugging Prometheus Operator resources is challenging, below you can find some of the issues that users reported:

Reviewer: Not only at KubeCon, but it has been a very old discussion between several members of the team in the past.

I remember talking about a CLI approach with @metalmatze and @paulfantom at least 2 years ago(even before I joined the team) 😛

### Why my Prometheus resource is not being created?

People were struggling to troubleshoot why their Prometheus resources were not being created. They were not sure if the issue was with the Prometheus Operator or with the Prometheus resource itself.

> After long investigation, they found out that the Prometheus Operator were only watching the namespace where the Prometheus Operator was deployed, and the Prometheus resource was being created in a different namespace.

Reviewer: If I remember correctly, the problem was not about creating Prometheus resources but correctly configuring them. Creating just a single "Prometheus" resource is fairly simple, but also setting up the right permissions, attaching service accounts, troubleshooting target discovery was not straight forward

### Why my ServiceMonitor is not being created?

People were struggling to troubleshoot why their ServiceMonitor resources were not being created. They were not sure if the issue was with the Prometheus Operator or with the ServiceMonitor resource itself.

After long investigation, they found out that the matchingLabels field in the ServiceMonitor resource was not matching the labels of the target Service.

> These are just some common issues that users reported, but there are many other issues that users face when managing Prometheus Operator resources, and we believe that a CLI tool can help users to manage Prometheus Operator resources more easily and efficiently.

Reviewer: Also, creating service monitors is fairly simple. The hard part was troubleshooting the discovery.

> ## Proposal

Reviewer: It's not entirely clear how the CLI (as a kubectl plugin) could help with CI validations 🤔

For CI we don't need the kubernetes cluster context, so I wonder if a kubectl plugin is the best choice here

We propose to create a new CLI tool to manage Prometheus Operator resources, allowing users to create, update, and delete Prometheus Operator resources using a simple CLI interface as well as troubleshoot and debug Prometheus Operator resources.

The main idea is to distribute this CLI as a [kubectl plugin](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/extend-kubectl/kubectl-plugins/) and the use experience should be similar to the `kubectl` CLI, as you can see in the example below:

```bash
kubectl prometheus-operator create prometheus --name my-prometheus --namespace my-namespace --replicas 2 --shards 2
```

### Where the code will live?

> The prometheus-operator-cli code will be placed in a dedicated repository under the [Prometheus organization](https://github.com/prometheus-operator), this will allow us to have a separeted lifecycle for the Prometheus Operator and the Prometheus Operator CLI and the following benefits:

Reviewer 2: Agreed.

> The prometheus-operator-cli code will be placed in a dedicated repository under the [Prometheus organization](https://github.com/prometheus-operator), this will allow us to have a separeted lifecycle for the Prometheus Operator and the Prometheus Operator CLI and the following benefits:

Reviewer 3: (nit)
```suggestion
The prometheus-operator-cli code will be placed in a dedicated repository under the [Prometheus organization](https://github.com/prometheus-operator), this will allow us to have a separate lifecycle for the Prometheus Operator and the Prometheus Operator CLI and the following benefits:
```

- We can have a dedicated team to maintain the Prometheus Operator CLI
- We can use the Prometheus Operator client as a customer and be more careful with the changes that we make in the Prometheus Operator codebase

> - We can have a dedicated release cycle for the Prometheus Operator CLI

Reviewer: > - We can have a dedicated team to maintain the Prometheus Operator CLI

That sounds nice! We can start small while we're still experimenting with it, but this could be a lower entry barrier if we decide to fully commit to the CLI!

> - We can use the Prometheus Operator client as a customer and be more careful with the changes that we make in the Prometheus Operator codebase

Actually, I see this point in favor of keeping both in the same repository actually 🤔. If we want to be really careful about consuming prom-operator pkgs in a separate binary, I'd keep both in the same repo and have tests covering the CLI use cases. That way we know if a PR that is focused on the operator will break something else

> - We can have a dedicated release cycle for the Prometheus Operator CLI

That sounds like the best motivation 👍

Reviewer 3: I'm fine starting with a dedicated repository to experiment but I could imagine that we merge it in the main repository eventually. 1) might be addressed with owner files and 2) might slow us down and/or create latency (the CLI might need to wait for an official release of the operator to support new features).

### General features

The Prometheus Operator CLI should have the following features, but not limited to:

#### Resource scaffolding

> Allow users create Prometheus Operator resources using a simple CLI interface, the CLI should generate the resource manifest based on the user input.

Reviewer: If someone wants to create a prometheus instance, are we scaffolding only the Prometheus resource or every other resource that is needed for it to run smoothly?

I don't see much value if it's only the Prometheus resource to be honest

Reviewer 3: Agreed, I'd love to see an interactive CLI which would generate all things for you

````
$ kubectl prometheus-operator create prometheus example --interactive
How many replicas (default: 2)?
How many shards (default: 1)?
Create service account (Yes/No, default: Yes)?
Service account name (default: example)?
Create service (Yes/No, default: Yes)?
...
Create Pod disruption budget (Yes/No, default: Yes)?
Service monitor selector (default: {})?
Service monitor namespace selector (default: {})?
...
````

Reviewer 2: I agree, this would be useful. Generating the RBAC, CRDs depending on the user's needs which will be understood from a questionaire like format seems cool.

Author: > If someone wants to create a prometheus instance, are we scaffolding only the Prometheus resource or every other resource that is needed for it to run smoothly?
> 
> I don't see much value if it's only the Prometheus resource to be honest

Both options are valid, you can have users with different use cases.
1. User deploying a entire stack: The interactive mode idea @simonpasquier shared is super cool and useful on this context, will help people deploy a entire stack easily.

3. User only creating extra resources for an existing stack, like we have with kubernetes create command, you can create a deployment without expose it and create a service independent of a deployment.

Author: > Agreed, I'd love to see an interactive CLI which would generate all things for you
> 
> ```
> $ kubectl prometheus-operator create prometheus example --interactive
> How many replicas (default: 2)?
> How many shards (default: 1)?
> Create service account (Yes/No, default: Yes)?
> Service account name (default: example)?
> Create service (Yes/No, default: Yes)?
> ...
> Create Pod disruption budget (Yes/No, default: Yes)?
> Service monitor selector (default: {})?
> Service monitor namespace selector (default: {})?
> ...
> ```

Just thinking out loud. 
Do you think we should make it a more generic prometheus cli and maybe in the future unite efforts with Thanos Operator?

Reviewer: I think this is thinking too much about the future, the CLI here is still under design and will be experimental for quite a while, prom and thanos operator is also very much uncertain. Now creating a CLI for thanos, joining projects and joining CLIs is just so distant... no need to consider something like this at the moment 😅

> This is especially useful for users that are not familiar with the Prometheus Operator resources, they can use the CLI to generate the resource manifest and then customize it according to their needs.

Reviewer 3: (nit)
```suggestion
This is especially useful for users that are not familiar with the Prometheus Operator resources, they can use the CLI to generate the resource manifests and then customize  according to their needs.
```

#### Linting and Validation

> Allow users to validate Prometheus Operator resources before creating them, the CLI should check if the resource manifest is valid and if it follows the best practices.

Reviewer: I'm not sure about what best practices you're referring to here 😅 

The idea of validating target discovery within CI sounds pretty good though!!!

Author: true haha, just removed it.

> This is especially useful for CI pipelines, where users can validate the Prometheus Operator resources before applying them to the cluster.

Reviewer 3: is it equivalent to "kubectl apply --dry-run ..."?

Reviewer: My understanding is validating in CI that specific targets will be selected by a specific Prometheus instance

Author: I'm thinking about starting with a simple --dry-run this we can ensure the resource per se, but the idea of validating deep selections sounds reasonable to me.

#### Troubleshooting and Debugging

> Allow users to troubleshoot and debug Prometheus Operator resources, the CLI should provide useful information about the Prometheus Operator resources, such as if the resource is being watched by the Prometheus Operator, if the labels are matching, etc.

Reviewer 3: :+1: it should answer questions like 
* which service/pod monitors/rules are selected by the Prometheus object `foo`?
* which targets are selected by PodMonitor `bar`?

Author: Agree, but most of the value of the CLI in my view is to improve the developer experience.
If we can just simplify the entire troubleshooting using only one tool which is very specialized to the given context, why not?

If we don't provide the trivial functionalities this means user needs to use different tools to get the information they wanna, like.

kubectl, get xxx -l label=value and later Prometheus-operator command arguments.

I think we can just simplify that, but maybe I'm overthinking.

Reviewer 3: I defintely agree that the tool should cater for different points of view and users will want to ask different questions depending on their journey.
